# seed-disp-bird-diet
# Seed dispersal and plant diet of fruit-eating birds in secondary Atlantic forest fragments
Carina Isabella Motta

Master's Student at São Paulo State University, Rio Claro

The mobility of fruit-eating birds makes them key seed dispersers in today’s fragmented landscape, ultimately driving the establishment and succession of new forests. Surrounding anthropogenic disturbances shape these early successional forests, favoring habitat generalist bird species and introducing exotic plants, resulting in novel, secondary forest communities. In order to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the seed dispersal processes essential for forest formation, we need to understand both the plants dispersed and the birds acting as dispersers. Identification of the conditions in which seed dispersal is most effective, coupled with knowledge of diet selection by fruit-eating birds, provides critical insights as to which plants will be dispersed. Bird plant diet can also indicate the quality of available resources, as well as foraging habits of species, both of which further determine seed dispersal potential. While we originally proposed to exclusively evaluate seed dispersal and consumption of P. guajava, an exotic tree species, mortality of P. guajava individuals, combined with the absence of fruiting individuals within the forest, led us to expand the scope of the project. In order to better understand under which conditions seed dispersal is most effective, as well as the plant species important to bird diet, we worked in ten plots of early successional forest throughout the Corumbataí river basin in the state of São Paulo. Over the course of a year, we mist netted in each plot once a month, collecting 417 dropping samples from 483 captures. We found seeds present in 65 droppings, containing a total of 1,970 seeds of at least 42 morphospecies. By calculating the quantitative component of seed dispersal effectiveness (SDE) on plot-level, we found that habitat feature differences in age, forest cover, and the zoochorous woody plant species community did not explain changes in SDE. We also identified principal seed dispersers by calculating SDE on a species level, as well as found that SDE is explained by the degree of bird frugivory, but not bird body mass. DNA was extracted from 31 droppings of key seed dispersing bird species, and amplified using a mini-barcode from the rbcL gene region to analyze plant diet by metabarcoding sequencing. Plant genera were identified by comparing the obtained sequences with the reference database from the NCBI, using Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST). Diet content and richness were classified for each bird species and we evaluated the frequency of consumption of plants according to origin (exotic or native) and plant life form across all bird species. Our analyses reveal at least 26 genera from 23 plant families. Plant diet content varied among individuals and species, with Miconia (Melastomataceae) being consumed most frequently. Average richness of plant diet per species ranged from 1 - 3 plant genera. Of the plant genera detected, we identified four as exotic, and, while a majority were classified as trees or shrubs, at least two as having an herbaceous growth form. Our findings demonstrate that while variation in seed dispersal exists among fragments, indicating heterogeneity in ecological functions, this variation is not explained by analyzed characteristics. We identified the most quantitatively effective bird species and diet analysis of these species indicates that they are foraging outside the forests, which can be interesting for connecting fragments (i.e. gene flow, introduction of new species), but can also increase the arrival and establishment of exotic species.



Data will be shared on Open Science Framework following an embargo to allow for publication of our findings later this year. DNA extraction protocols will be published on protocols.io. Resulting DNA sequences from this project will be submitted for publication on GenBank in late 2024. 
